ADF(azure data factory)
it is platform which we used for orchestration and ETL transformation.
orchestration - automating the ETL or ELT process.

Components of ADF:
Pipelines -
Activities -
Intergration Runtime -
Linked Service
Datasets -
Dataflow -
Triggers -


what is Integration Runtime?
It provides compute infrastructure for data movement.
in adf we have 3 types IR:

Default IR or AutoResolveIR -
it is used for data movement between cloud to cloud.

Self Hosted Intergration Runtime:
it is used for data movement between on primesis servers to cloud.

SSIS (sql server integration services) IR - 
In sql servers 
we will have ETL pipleines on sql servers we will convert this to SSIS packages 
and migrate that packages from on servers to cloud.

Pipelines - 
it is combination of many activities which are bound to together to complete the
final task flow.

Activities - 
in adf each activity performs the specific task.

linked services -
we are storing the connection string information

Datasets -
it will point out to actual location of the data where it is stored.

Dataflow -
it is graphical user interface based ETL pipeline creation tool.

Triggers -
to automate the execution of the pipelines.
3 types:
schedules trigger -
this executes the pipeline run at specific time interval.

event based trigger -
whenever the particular event happens the pipeline should be executed.

Tumbling windows trigger -
here we will create the time windows

10 years-1 
2010 - 2011
2013 - 2015
2016 - 2018
2019 - 2020

Activities -
Copy Data - 
it is used to copy the data from source to sink

dataset(adls gen2) -
<container name>/<folders>/<filenames>

example/bronze/demo/demo1/emp.csv

we have an option of Copy behavior
flatten hirarchy -
source
bronze--->demo--->demo1---->emp.csv,dept.csv
sink(destination)
emp.csv
dept.csv

merge files -
it simple merges the files

preserve hirarchy - 
source
bronze--->demo--->demo1---->emp.csv,dept.csv
sink
it will preserve the same structure
bronze--->demo--->demo1---->emp.csv,dept.csv

Q)you have 100 files and 100 tables and you want to copy the files from source to 
particular table?
file1.csv  table1
file2.csv  table2
file3.csv  table3

how many copy activity will be required 
and give the steps to design the pipeline

paramertised dataset -
this is used to make dataset dynamic so that it can take the mulitple
items(file or table)

Steps - 
1 - we have to create a control table(this will help you to map file
with respective tables)
employee.csv  ----> emp
department.csv ----> dept

2 - we will use lookup activity to read the control table.

lookup activity -
it is used to read the data that is present in file or table.

get metadata activity -
this activity will give you the metadata information about the file or table.
field list(metadata information)
item name,item type,column count

forEach activity -
it is used to iterate the array elements.

set variable activity -
it is used to give the value to the variable.


Q) in one folder you have different format of files(csv,json,xlsx)
destination you have that format(csv,json,excel)

you want to copy the csv file to csv folder,
json file to json folder,excel file to excel folder

you have to design the pipeline for this

fileName = ['aaa.csv','bbb.json','ccc.xlsx']
for i in fileName:
  if i.spilt('.')[1] == 'csv':
     print('this is csv file',i)
  elif i.spilt('.')[1] == 'json':
     print('this is json file ',i)
  elif i.spilt('.')[1] == 'xlsx': 
     print('this is excel file ',i)

if <condition>:
   go here
else:

Q) can you use ForEach Activity Inside ForEach Activity,But still you i want
use this how can i achieve this.

we cannot use forEach inside forEach acitivity
we can achieve this by using execute pipleine acitivty

execute pipleine acitivty -
it is used to call(run) one pipeline inside another pipeline.

script acitivity - 
if you want to use DML operations on any database table 

Stored Procedure -
used to call the stored procedure created in database.

Notebook Acitivity -
it is used to call(run) the notebook from azure databricks

How to use/access the output of the ADF activity activity into the azure
databricks notebook?

we want to create the dataframe of the table present in azure sql database


What is difference between parameter and variable in pipelines?

parameter - these cannot be changed while the runtime of the pipeline.

variable -  we can change the value of the variable while the runtime.

what are types of parameters in adf?

parameters - these are accessible by only that particular pipeline where it 
is created.

global parameters - these are accessible by all the available pipelines.



